@node System Architecture
@chapter System Architecture

This chapter describes the internal architecture of Xeetapus, including
the organization of the backend and frontend components, the data flow
through the system, and the rationale behind key design decisions.

@menu
* High-Level Overview::           System components at a glance.
* Backend Structure::             Backend modules and their responsibilities.
* HTTP Server::                  How the HTTP server is implemented.
* Database Layer::               Database abstraction and migrations.
* Frontend Structure::           Frontend components and state management.
* Data Flow::                    How requests travel through the system.
* Security Architecture::         Security components and their interactions.
* Performance Considerations::    Optimization strategies and limitations.
* Design Rationale::             Why certain technologies were chosen.
@end menu

@node High-Level Overview
@section High-Level Overview

Xeetapus follows a traditional client-server architecture.  The client
is a single-page application written in React, while the server is a
custom HTTP server written in Zig.  The two communicate exclusively
through a RESTful JSON API.

The system consists of three main layers:

@enumerate
@item
The frontend, which runs in the user's web browser and provides the
user interface.

@item
The backend HTTP server, which handles client requests, enforces
security policies, and manages application logic.

@item
The database, which provides persistent storage for all application
data.
@end enumerate

The following diagram illustrates the high-level architecture:

@verbatim
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        User Browser                           │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  │               React Frontend (Port 3000)             │    │
│  │  ┌───────────┐ ┌──────────┐ ┌────────────────────┐ │    │
│  │  │Components │ │  Pages   │ │   API Client       │ │    │
│  │  └───────────┘ └──────────┘ └────────────────────┘ │    │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘    │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │ HTTP/REST
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    Zig Backend (Port 8080)                    │
│  ┌─────────────┐ ┌───────────┐ ┌─────────────────────────┐  │
│  │HTTP Server │ │ Middleware│ │     Route Handlers      │  │
│  └─────────────┘ └───────────┘ └─────────────────────────┘  │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│  │     Posts      Users    Timeline    Auth   ...      │   │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│  ┌─────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌─────────────────┐   │
│  │ Config  │ │Database │ │Security │ │   Validation    │   │
│  └─────────┘ └─────────┘ └─────────┘ └─────────────────┘   │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                  SQLite Database                              │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
@end verbatim

Each layer has clearly defined responsibilities and communicates with
adjacent layers through well-defined interfaces.

@node Backend Structure
@section Backend Structure

The backend is organized as a collection of Zig source modules, each
responsible for a specific area of functionality.

@table @asis
@item main.zig
The application entry point.  This module initializes configuration,
sets up the database, registers routes, and starts the HTTP server.

@item http.zig
The HTTP server implementation.  This module handles TCP connections,
parses HTTP requests, and manages routing.

@item config.zig
Configuration management.  Reads environment variables and provides
typed access to configuration values throughout the application.

@item db.zig
Database abstraction.  Manages the SQLite connection, executes queries,
and handles schema migrations.

@item auth.zig
Authentication logic.  Handles user registration, login, logout, and
session management.

@item security.zig
Security-related functionality.  Exports security utilities from other
modules for convenience.

@item password.zig
Password hashing using Argon2id.  Provides secure password hashing and
verification, while still recognizing legacy hashes for migration.

@item tokens.zig
JWT token generation and validation.  Creates signed tokens containing
user session information.

@item payments.zig
Monero payment support.  Handles exchange-rate lookups, invoice
creation, and payment status checks.

@item llm.zig
Per-user LLM provider configuration and chat endpoints.

@item media.zig
Media upload and static file serving.

@item ratelimit.zig
Rate limiting implementation.  Tracks request counts per IP address
and enforces configurable limits.

@item validation.zig
Input validation and sanitization.  Validates user input according to
defined rules and sanitizes data to prevent injection attacks.

@item audit.zig
Security audit logging.  Records security-relevant events such as
login attempts and administrative actions.

@item posts.zig, users.zig, timeline.zig, etc.
Domain-specific route handlers for posts, users, timeline, and other
application features.
@end table

@node HTTP Server
@section HTTP Server

The HTTP server is implemented from scratch in Zig rather than using an
existing framework.  This provides several advantages:

@itemize @bullet
@item
No external dependencies beyond the Zig standard library.

@item
Small binary size, suitable for constrained environments.

@item
Full control over request handling semantics.
@end itemize

The server supports several categories of routes:

@table @asis
@item Public routes
Accessible without authentication.  These include health checks and
public profile data.

@item Protected routes
Require a valid @code{auth_token} cookie or bearer token.  The server
validates the JWT token before invoking the handler.

@item Parameterized routes
Include variable segments such as @code{:id} or @code{:username}.
The server extracts these values and passes them to handlers.
@end table

@node Database Layer
@section Database Layer

The database layer abstracts SQLite operations behind a simple interface.
It handles connection management, query execution, and schema
migrations.

SQLite was chosen for its simplicity and zero-configuration operation.
The database file is stored on disk and can be backed up using
standard file tools.  Migrations are applied automatically on startup.

@node Frontend Structure
@section Frontend Structure

The frontend is a React single-page application built with Vite.  It is
organized into several directories:

@table @asis
@item src/components/
Reusable user interface components.  The @file{ui/} subdirectory
contains primitive components from Radix UI.

@item src/pages/
Route components that correspond to application pages.  Each page
handles a specific URL path.

@item src/context/
React context providers for global state, particularly authentication
state.

@item src/api.ts
The centralized API client that handles all communication with the
backend.

@item src/types.ts
TypeScript type definitions for API requests and responses.
@end table

State management uses React's built-in mechanisms: @code{useState}
for local component state, context providers for shared state, and
React Router for navigation state.

@node Data Flow
@section Data Flow

Understanding how requests flow through the system is helpful when
debugging or extending Xeetapus.

@subheading Request Processing Pipeline

When a client makes a request, it passes through several stages:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Rate limiting.}  The server checks whether the client's IP
address has exceeded the rate limit.  If so, a @code{429 Too Many
Requests} response is returned.

@item
@strong{CORS validation.}  The server checks whether the request's
origin is in the allowed list.  If not, a @code{403 Forbidden}
response is returned.

@item
@strong{Route matching.}  The server attempts to match the request path
to a registered route.  If no route matches, a @code{404 Not Found}
response is returned.

@item
@strong{Authentication.}  For protected routes, the server extracts the
auth token from the cookie or Authorization header and validates the
JWT token.  If the token is invalid or missing, a @code{401 Unauthorized}
response is returned.

@item
@strong{CSRF verification.}  For state-changing requests (POST, PUT,
DELETE), the server validates the CSRF token.  If the token is invalid,
a @code{403 Forbidden} response is returned.

@item
@strong{Input validation.}  Request body parameters are validated
according to the route's rules.  Invalid input results in a
@code{400 Bad Request} response.

@item
@strong{Route handler.}  If all preceding checks pass, the request
reaches the route handler, which executes the business logic and
generates a response.

@item
@strong{Security headers.}  Before sending the response, the server
adds security-related HTTP headers such as @code{X-Frame-Options} and
@code{Content-Security-Policy}.
@end enumerate

@subheading Authentication Flow

When a user logs in, the following sequence occurs:

@enumerate
@item
The client sends a POST request to @code{/api/auth/login} with the
username and password.

@item
The server validates the credentials against the stored password hash.

@item
On success, the server generates a JWT token containing the user's ID.

@item
The server sets an @code{auth_token} cookie containing the JWT token
and returns the user's profile plus a CSRF token.

@item
On subsequent requests, the browser automatically includes the
auth_token cookie.

@item
The server extracts and validates the JWT from the cookie.
@end enumerate

@node Security Architecture
@section Security Architecture

Security is implemented as a series of independent layers, each
addressing a specific threat.  This defense-in-depth approach ensures
that a failure in one layer does not compromise the entire system.

For detailed information about security features, see @ref{Security
Implementation}.

The main security components are:

@table @asis
@item Password hashing
Passwords are hashed using Argon2id with configurable time, memory, and
parallelism parameters.  The backend still recognizes legacy PBKDF2 and
SHA-256 hashes during migration.

@item JWT tokens
Authentication tokens are signed using HMAC-SHA256.  The server verifies
the signature and expiration before trusting the token contents.

@item CSRF protection
State-changing requests require a valid CSRF token in the
@code{X-CSRF-Token} header.  Tokens are signed and expire after 24
hours.

@item Rate limiting
IP-based rate limiting prevents brute force attacks and denial of
service.  The sliding window algorithm provides fair throttling.

@item Input validation
All user input is validated before use.  This prevents injection attacks
and ensures data integrity.
@end table

@node Performance Considerations
@section Performance Considerations

Xeetapus is designed for simplicity and correctness rather than
maximum performance.  Nevertheless, several measures ensure reasonable
responsiveness.

@subheading Backend Optimizations

The backend uses several performance techniques:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Single database connection with efficient query patterns avoids
connection overhead.

@item
Arena allocators reduce memory allocation frequency during request
handling.

@item
Static files are served from memory when possible, reducing disk I/O.

@item
SQLite with appropriate indexes handles typical workloads efficiently.
@end itemize

@subheading Frontend Optimizations

The frontend build process includes several optimizations:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Code splitting separates vendor libraries (React, React DOM) from
application code, improving caching efficiency.

@item
Vite's development server provides fast module replacement during
development.

@item
Tailwind CSS removes unused styles, reducing CSS bundle size.
@end itemize

@subheading Scalability Limitations

The current architecture has some limitations for large-scale
deployments:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Single-process backend cannot utilize multiple CPU cores without
additional configuration.

@item
SQLite uses a file-based locking model that limits concurrent write
throughput.

@item
No built-in caching layer means repeated database queries are not
memoized.
@end itemize

For high-traffic deployments, consider running multiple backend
instances behind a load balancer, migrating to PostgreSQL, or adding a
caching layer such as Redis.

@node Design Rationale
@section Design Rationale

This section explains why certain technical decisions were made.

@subsection Why Zig for the Backend?

Zig was chosen for several reasons:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Performance comparable to C, important for a server handling many
concurrent connections.

@item
Memory safety without garbage collection, reducing latency spikes.

@item
Single binary deployment, simplifying operations.

@item
Direct SQLite bindings through a simple C interop mechanism.
@end itemize

@subsection Why SQLite?

SQLite provides several advantages for a project like Xeetapus:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Zero-configuration operation.  No database server to install or manage.

@item
Single-file database makes backups trivial.

@item
Sufficient performance for moderate traffic levels.

@item
Easy migration to PostgreSQL if needed later.
@end itemize

@subsection Why React?

React is a mature, widely-used framework with excellent tooling:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Large ecosystem of libraries and components.

@item
Strong TypeScript integration catches errors at compile time.

@item
Vite provides an excellent development experience with fast hot module
replacement.

@item
Wide availability of developers familiar with the framework.
@end itemize

@cindex architecture
@cindex backend
@cindex frontend
@cindex data flow
