@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

This chapter describes all configuration options available in
Xeetapus.  Configuration is performed through environment variables,
which may be set in a @file{.env} file or exported directly in the
shell.

@menu
* Environment Variables::        Overview of all settings.
* Required Settings::            Variables you must set.
* Optional Settings::            Variables with default values.
* Backend Configuration::        The backend @file{.env} file.
* Frontend Configuration::        The frontend @file{.env} file.
* Nginx Configuration::           Setting up nginx as a reverse proxy.
* OpenRC Configuration::           Init script setup for OpenRC systems.
* Secret Generation::            How to create secure secrets.
* Environment Examples::          Typical configurations for different environments.
@end menu

@node Environment Variables
@section Environment Variables

Xeetapus is configured through environment variables.  The backend
reads these variables at startup, and many affect the behavior of the
system.  Variables may be specified in a @file{.env} file in the
backend directory, or exported directly in the shell.

@table @asis
@item XEETAPUS_ENV
Controls the environment mode.  Valid values are @code{development},
@code{staging}, and @code{production}.  This affects logging verbosity,
security settings, and other runtime behaviors.

@item XEETAPUS_PORT
The port on which the backend HTTP server listens.  The default is
@code{8080}.

@item XEETAPUS_DB_PATH
Path to the SQLite database file.  The default is @code{xeetapus.db}
in the working directory.

@item XEETAPUS_MEDIA_PATH
Directory where uploaded media files are stored.  The default is
@code{/var/www/xeetapus/media}.
@end table

@node Required Settings
@section Required Settings

The following environment variables @strong{must} be set for Xeetapus to
operate.  There are no safe defaults for these values, and you must
provide your own.

@table @asis
@item XEETAPUS_JWT_SECRET
@vindex XEETAPUS_JWT_SECRET
The secret key used to sign JSON Web Tokens (JWT).  This value should
be at least 64 characters of random data.  To generate a suitable
secret, use:

@example
openssl rand -base64 64
@end example

This secret is critical for authentication security.  If it is
compromised, attackers may forge authentication tokens.

@item XEETAPUS_CSRF_SECRET
@vindex XEETAPUS_CSRF_SECRET
The secret key used to sign CSRF tokens.  This value should be at
least 32 characters of random data.  To generate a suitable secret,
use:

@example
openssl rand -base64 32
@end example

The CSRF secret protects against cross-site request forgery attacks.
@end table

@node Optional Settings
@section Optional Settings

The following variables have sensible defaults but may be tuned for
your environment.

@table @asis
@item XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS
@vindex XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS
Comma-separated list of allowed CORS origins.  The default is
@code{http://localhost:3000}.  In production, you must specify the
exact domain(s) that will access the API.  Wildcards are not
permitted except for subdomain patterns like @code{*.example.com}.

Example for production:

@example
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=https://example.com,https://www.example.com
@end example

@item XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS
@vindex XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS
Maximum number of requests permitted per rate limit window.  The
default is @code{100}.

@item XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW
@vindex XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW
Duration of the rate limit window in seconds.  The default is
@code{60}.

@item XEETAPUS_MAX_REQUEST_SIZE
@vindex XEETAPUS_MAX_REQUEST_SIZE
Maximum size of incoming HTTP request bodies in bytes.  The default
is @code{10485760} (10 megabytes).

@item XEETAPUS_PBKDF2_ITERATIONS
@vindex XEETAPUS_PBKDF2_ITERATIONS
Number of iterations used for PBKDF2 password hashing.  Higher
values increase security but also increase CPU usage during
authentication.  The default is @code{32768}.  Production deployments
may wish to increase this to @code{60000} or higher.

@item XEETAPUS_MONERO_ADDRESS
@vindex XEETAPUS_MONERO_ADDRESS
Monero wallet address for receiving payments.  Leave empty to disable
payment features.

@item XEETAPUS_MONEROD_URL
@vindex XEETAPUS_MONEROD_URL
URL of the Monero daemon RPC server.  The default is
@code{http://localhost:18081}.
@end table

@node Backend Configuration
@section Backend Configuration

The backend reads configuration from the @file{backend/.env} file.
A template is provided at @file{backend/.env.example}.

@subheading Creating the Configuration File

@example
cd backend
cp .env.example .env
@end example

Then edit @file{backend/.env} and set the required values as described
in @ref{Required Settings}.

The configuration file uses standard shell syntax.  Lines beginning
with @code{#} are comments.  Variable assignments take the form:

@example
VARIABLE_NAME=value
@end example

There should be no spaces around the @code{=} sign.

@node Frontend Configuration
@section Frontend Configuration

The frontend reads configuration from environment variables prefixed
with @code{VITE_}.  These are embedded into the JavaScript bundle at
build time.

@subheading VITE_API_URL

This variable specifies the URL of the backend API.  For local
development:

@example
VITE_API_URL=http://localhost:8080/api
@end example

For production, set this to your actual API domain:

@example
VITE_API_URL=https://api.example.com/api
@end example

@subheading Build Configuration

The frontend build system is configured in @file{frontend/vite.config.ts}.
The default configuration is suitable for most deployments.  Key
settings include the development server port and the proxy rules for
API and media requests.

@node Nginx Configuration
@section Nginx Configuration

For production deployments, it is recommended to run Xeetapus behind a
reverse proxy such as nginx.  This provides SSL termination, static file
caching, and additional security headers.

@subheading Example Configuration

The following is a complete nginx server block for Xeetapus.  Save
this as @file{/etc/nginx/sites-available/xeetapus}:

@verbatim
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    return 301 https://$server_name$request_uri;
}

server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    server_name example.com;

    ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem;
    ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
    ssl_ciphers ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256;
    ssl_prefer_server_ciphers off;

    add_header Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains; preload" always;
    add_header X-Frame-Options "DENY" always;
    add_header X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff" always;

    client_max_body_size 10M;

    location /api {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
    }

    location /media {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    }

    location / {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    }
}
@end verbatim

@subheading Enabling the Site

To enable the site:

@example
sudo ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/xeetapus /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/
sudo nginx -t
sudo systemctl reload nginx
@end example

@node OpenRC Configuration
@section OpenRC Configuration

On systems using OpenRC (such as Gentoo or Alpine Linux), use the
provided init script to manage Xeetapus as a system service.

@subheading Installing the Init Script

@example
sudo cp deploy/openrc/xeetapus /etc/init.d/xeetapus
sudo chmod +x /etc/init.d/xeetapus
@end example

@subheading Configuration File

Create the configuration file at @file{/etc/conf.d/xeetapus}:

@verbatim
XEETAPUS_USER=nginx
XEETAPUS_GROUP=nginx
XEETAPUS_DIR=/var/www/xeetapus
XEETAPUS_LOG=/var/log/xeetapus.log
@end verbatim

@subheading Managing the Service

@example
rc-update add xeetapus default
rc-service xeetapus start
rc-service xeetapus stop
rc-service xeetapus restart
rc-service xeetapus status
@end example

@node Secret Generation
@section Secret Generation

Cryptographically secure secrets are essential for the security of
your deployment.  Never use predictable values or the example values
from template files.

To generate a JWT secret (64 characters minimum):

@example
openssl rand -base64 64
@end example

To generate a CSRF secret (32 characters minimum):

@example
openssl rand -base64 32
@end example

Store these values securely.  If you need to migrate to a new server,
copy these secrets to maintain existing user sessions.

@node Environment Examples
@section Environment Examples

The following are typical configurations for different deployment
scenarios.

@subsection Development

@example
XEETAPUS_ENV=development
XEETAPUS_PORT=8080
XEETAPUS_DB_PATH=xeetapus.db
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=http://localhost:3000,http://localhost:5173
@end example

@subsection Staging

@example
XEETAPUS_ENV=staging
XEETAPUS_PORT=8080
XEETAPUS_DB_PATH=/var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=https://staging.example.com
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS=100
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW=60
@end example

@subsection Production

@example
XEETAPUS_ENV=production
XEETAPUS_PORT=8080
XEETAPUS_DB_PATH=/var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db
XEETAPUS_MEDIA_PATH=/var/www/xeetapus/media
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=https://example.com,https://www.example.com
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS=100
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW=60
XEETAPUS_MAX_REQUEST_SIZE=10485760
XEETAPUS_PBKDF2_ITERATIONS=60000
@end example

@cindex configuration
@cindex environment variables
@cindex nginx
