@node Database Schema
@chapter Database Schema

This chapter describes the database schema used by Xeetapus.  The
database is implemented using SQLite, a lightweight, serverless database
engine.  All application data is stored in a single file.

@menu
* Introduction::                 Overview of the database.
* Users Table::                  User accounts and profiles.
* Posts Table::                  User posts (xeets).
* Social Tables::                Likes, follows, comments, and reposts.
* Notifications Table::          User notifications.
* Communities Table::            Topic-based groups.
* Messages Table::               Direct messaging.
* Polls Table::                  Poll system.
* Blocking and Muting::          User restrictions.
* Drafts Table::                  Saved drafts.
* LLM Configuration::             AI provider settings.
* Indexes::                      Database indexes for performance.
* Migrations::                   Schema versioning.
* Backup and Restore::            Data protection.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@section Introduction

The Xeetapus database is stored as a single SQLite file.  By default,
this file is named @file{xeetapus.db} and is located in the backend
directory.  The location may be changed using the
@env{XEETAPUS_DB_PATH} environment variable.

SQLite was chosen for its simplicity.  There is no database server to
install or configure; the database is simply a file on disk.  This
makes backups straightforward: simply copy the file to another location.

The database schema is versioned through a migration system.  Migrations
are applied automatically when the server starts.  New schema changes are
recorded as migrations in the source code.

@node Users Table
@section Users Table

The @code{users} table stores user account information.

@float Table, tab:users
@caption{users}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique user ID
@item username @tab TEXT @tab UNIQUE, NOT NULL @tab Username (3-20 chars)
@item email @tab TEXT @tab UNIQUE, NOT NULL @tab Email address
@item password_hash @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab PBKDF2 hash of password
@item display_name @tab TEXT @tab @tab Public display name
@item bio @tab TEXT @tab @tab User biography
@item avatar_url @tab TEXT @tab @tab URL to avatar image
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Account creation time
@item updated_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Last modification time
@end multitable
@end float

Indexes are created on the @code{username} and @code{email} columns to
ensure fast lookups during authentication and profile retrieval.

@example
INSERT INTO users (username, email, password_hash)
VALUES ('johndoe', 'john@@example.com', '$pbkdf2-sha256$...');
@end example

@node Posts Table
@section Posts Table

The @code{posts} table stores user-generated content.

@float Table, tab:posts
@caption{posts}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique post ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Author's user ID
@item content @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Post content (max 280 chars)
@item media_urls @tab TEXT @tab @tab JSON array of media URLs
@item reply_to_id @tab INTEGER @tab FK(posts.id) @tab Parent post (for replies)
@item poll_id @tab INTEGER @tab FK(polls.id) @tab Attached poll (optional)
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

Posts support several features:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Regular posts containing text content.

@item
Replies to other posts (indicated by @code{reply_to_id}).

@item
Posts with attached media (stored as a JSON array in @code{media_urls}).

@item
Posts with attached polls (indicated by @code{poll_id}).
@end itemize

Indexes are created on @code{user_id} for user lookups, @code{created_at}
for timeline queries, and @code{reply_to_id} for loading replies.

@node Social Tables
@section Social Tables

Several tables track social relationships and interactions.

@float Table, tab:likes
@caption{likes}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique like ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User who liked
@item post_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(posts.id) @tab Liked post
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Like time
@end multitable
@end float

A unique constraint on @code{(user_id, post_id)} ensures a user cannot
like the same post twice.

@float Table, tab:follows
@caption{follows}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique follow ID
@item follower_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User following
@item following_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User being followed
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Follow time
@end multitable
@end float

A unique constraint on @code{(follower_id, following_id)} prevents
duplicate follow relationships.

@float Table, tab:comments
@caption{comments}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique comment ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Comment author
@item post_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(posts.id) @tab Commented post
@item content @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Comment content
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

@node Notifications Table
@section Notifications Table

The @code{notifications} table tracks events that users should be
informed about.

@float Table, tab:notifications
@caption{notifications}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique notification ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Recipient user
@item actor_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User who triggered event
@item type @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Event type
@item post_id @tab INTEGER @tab FK(posts.id) @tab Related post (if applicable)
@item read @tab INTEGER @tab DEFAULT 0 @tab Read status (0 = unread, 1 = read)
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

The @code{type} column indicates the nature of the notification:

@table @asis
@item like
Another user liked one of your posts.

@item follow
Another user followed you.

@item mention
Another user mentioned you in a post.

@item comment
Another user commented on your post.

@item repost
Another user reposted your post.
@end table

@node Communities Table
@section Communities Table

The @code{communities} table stores topic-based groups.

@float Table, tab:communities
@caption{communities}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique community ID
@item name @tab TEXT @tab UNIQUE, NOT NULL @tab Community name
@item description @tab TEXT @tab @tab Community description
@item created_by @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Creator user ID
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

Community memberships are tracked in a separate @code{community_members}
table (not shown).  Posts can optionally belong to a community via the
@code{community_id} column in the @code{posts} table.

@node Messages Table
@section Messages Table

The @code{messages} table stores direct messages between users.

@float Table, tab:messages
@caption{messages}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique message ID
@item conversation_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(conversations.id) @tab Conversation
@item sender_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Sender user ID
@item content @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Message content
@item media_urls @tab TEXT @tab @tab JSON array of media URLs
@item read @tab INTEGER @tab DEFAULT 0 @tab Read status (0 = unread, 1 = read)
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Send time
@end multitable
@end float

Conversations are stored in a separate @code{conversations} table that
tracks the participants.  This design allows efficient listing of
conversations without scanning all messages.

@node Polls Table
@section Polls Table

The poll system uses three tables: @code{polls}, @code{poll_options}, and
@code{poll_votes}.

@float Table, tab:polls
@caption{polls}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique poll ID
@item post_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(posts.id) @tab Associated post
@item question @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Poll question
@item duration_minutes @tab INTEGER @tab DEFAULT 1440 @tab Duration in minutes
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@item ends_at @tab DATETIME @tab @tab Computed end time
@end multitable
@end float

@float Table, tab:poll-options
@caption{poll_options}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique option ID
@item poll_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(polls.id) @tab Parent poll
@item option_text @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Option text
@item position @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL @tab Display order
@item vote_count @tab INTEGER @tab DEFAULT 0 @tab Number of votes
@end multitable
@end float

@float Table, tab:poll-votes
@caption{poll_votes}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique vote ID
@item poll_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(polls.id) @tab Poll voted on
@item option_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(poll_options.id) @tab Chosen option
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Voter
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Vote time
@end multitable
@end float

A unique constraint on @code{(poll_id, user_id)} ensures a user can
vote only once per poll.

@node Blocking and Muting
@section Blocking and Muting

The @code{blocks} and @code{mutes} tables track user restrictions.

@float Table, tab:blocks
@caption{blocks}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique block ID
@item blocker_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User who blocked
@item blocked_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Blocked user
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Block time
@end multitable
@end float

@float Table, tab:mutes
@caption{mutes}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique mute ID
@item muter_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User who muted
@item muted_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Muted user
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Mute time
@end multitable
@end float

Both tables have unique constraints preventing duplicate relationships.

Blocking is more restrictive than muting: blocked users cannot see your
content or interact with you.  Muted users are simply hidden from your
timeline without their knowledge.

@node Drafts Table
@section Drafts Table

The @code{drafts} table stores unpublished post drafts.

@float Table, tab:drafts
@caption{drafts}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique draft ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab Author
@item content @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Draft content
@item media_urls @tab TEXT @tab @tab JSON array of media URLs
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

Drafts are private to each user and are not visible to others.

@node LLM Configuration
@section LLM Configuration

The @code{llm_provider_configs} table stores per-user AI provider settings.

@float Table, tab:llm-provider-configs
@caption{llm_provider_configs}
@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.15 0.25 0.4
@headitem Column @tab Type @tab Constraints @tab Description
@item id @tab INTEGER @tab PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT @tab Unique config ID
@item user_id @tab INTEGER @tab NOT NULL, FK(users.id) @tab User
@item provider @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Provider name
@item api_key @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Encrypted API key
@item model @tab TEXT @tab NOT NULL @tab Model name
@item base_url @tab TEXT @tab @tab Custom API URL (optional)
@item is_default @tab INTEGER @tab DEFAULT 0 @tab Default provider flag
@item created_at @tab DATETIME @tab DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP @tab Creation time
@end multitable
@end float

A unique constraint on @code{(user_id, provider)} ensures one default
configuration per provider per user.

@node Indexes
@section Indexes

Indexes improve query performance for common operations.  The following
indexes are recommended for production deployments:

@example
-- Users table
CREATE INDEX idx_users_username ON users(username);
CREATE INDEX idx_users_email ON users(email);

-- Posts table
CREATE INDEX idx_posts_user_id ON posts(user_id);
CREATE INDEX idx_posts_created_at ON posts(created_at DESC);
CREATE INDEX idx_posts_reply_to_id ON posts(reply_to_id);

-- Likes table
CREATE INDEX idx_likes_post_id ON likes(post_id);
CREATE INDEX idx_likes_user_id ON likes(user_id);

-- Follows table
CREATE INDEX idx_follows_follower ON follows(follower_id);
CREATE INDEX idx_follows_following ON follows(following_id);

-- Notifications table
CREATE INDEX idx_notifications_user ON notifications(user_id);
CREATE INDEX idx_notifications_read ON notifications(read);

-- Messages table
CREATE INDEX idx_messages_conversation ON messages(conversation_id);
CREATE INDEX idx_messages_created ON messages(created_at DESC);
@end example

The SQLite query optimizer will automatically use these indexes when
available.  Check query performance using the @code{EXPLAIN QUERY PLAN}
command.

@node Migrations
@section Migrations

The database schema is versioned through a migration system in
@file{backend/src/db.zig}.  Migrations are applied automatically when
the server starts.

New tables are created using @code{CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS}
statements, which ensures idempotency.  Existing tables can be modified
using @code{ALTER TABLE} statements recorded in the schema migrations
array.

To add a new table:

@enumerate
@item
Add a @code{CREATE TABLE} statement to the @code{migrations} array in
@file{db.zig}.

@item
Restart the server.  The migration will be applied automatically.
@end enumerate

@node Backup and Restore
@section Backup and Restore

Because the database is a single file, backup and restore operations
are straightforward.

@subheading Manual Backup

@example
sqlite3 /path/to/xeetapus.db ".backup '/path/to/backup.db'"
@end example

Or simply copy the file:

@example
cp /path/to/xeetapus.db /path/to/backup.db
@end example

It is recommended to stop the server before making backups to ensure a
consistent snapshot.

@subheading Automated Backup

A cron job can automate daily backups:

@example
0 2 * * * sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db ".backup '/var/backups/xeetapus-$(date +\%Y\%m\%d).db'"
@end example

@subheading Restore

To restore from a backup:

@enumerate
@item
Stop the server.

@item
Copy the backup file over the current database:
@example
cp /path/to/backup.db /path/to/xeetapus.db
@end example

@item
Restart the server.
@end enumerate

@subheading Database Maintenance

Periodically run these commands to maintain database performance:

@example
-- Optimize storage
VACUUM;

-- Update query planner statistics
ANALYZE;

-- Check for corruption
PRAGMA integrity_check;
@end example

@cindex database
@cindex SQLite
@cindex schema
@cindex migrations
