@node Deployment Guide
@chapter Deployment Guide

This chapter describes how to deploy Xeetapus to a production server.
Following these instructions will result in a secure, reliable
installation suitable for serving real users.

@menu
* Prerequisites::               Server requirements and software.
* Building for Production::       Compiling release binaries.
* Server Setup::                 Preparing the server environment.
* Reverse Proxy::                Configuring nginx.
* TLS Certificates::             Setting up HTTPS.
* Service Management::           Running Xeetapus as a system service.
* Database Management::           Backup and maintenance.
* Monitoring::                  Health checks and logging.
* Backup Strategy::              Automated backup procedures.
* Upgrading::                    Updating to new versions.
* Troubleshooting::              Solving common deployment problems.
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

Before deploying Xeetapus, ensure your server meets the requirements.

@subheading Server Requirements

@table @asis
@item CPU
One core is sufficient for moderate traffic.  Two or more cores are
recommended for better performance.

@item Memory
512 MB is the minimum; 1 GB or more is recommended for smooth operation.

@item Storage
At least 1 GB for the application and database.  Plan additional space
for media uploads and backups.

@item Operating System
Linux is recommended.  Ubuntu 22.04 LTS or Debian 12 are good choices.
Other distributions will work but have not been tested.
@end table

@subheading Required Software

@table @asis
@item SQLite
Pre-installed on most Linux distributions.  The development libraries may
be needed for certain build configurations.

@item Nginx
A reverse proxy and web server.  Other proxies such as Caddy may be used
but this guide covers nginx specifically.

@item TLS Certificate
A valid SSL/TLS certificate is required for HTTPS.  Let's Encrypt
provides free certificates.

@item Init System
systemd (most Linux distributions) or OpenRC (Gentoo, Alpine).  The
appropriate init script is included with Xeetapus.
@end table

@node Building for Production
@section Building for Production

Before deploying, you must build optimized release versions of both the
backend and frontend.

@subheading Building the Backend

The backend should be built with optimizations enabled:

@example
cd backend
zig build -Doptimize=ReleaseFast
@end example

This produces a smaller, faster binary at
@file{backend/zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend}.

@subheading Building the Frontend

Install dependencies and build the production bundle:

@example
cd frontend
npm install
npm run build
@end example

The production build is placed in @file{frontend/dist/}.

@subheading Using Just

The Just task runner automates the build process:

@example
just build
@end example

This builds both components in sequence.

@node Server Setup
@section Server Setup

This section describes how to prepare the server environment.

@subheading Creating Directories

Create the directory structure for the installation:

@example
sudo mkdir -p /var/www/xeetapus
sudo mkdir -p /var/www/xeetapus/media
sudo mkdir -p /var/log
sudo mkdir -p /var/backups
@end example

@subheading Setting Permissions

Create a dedicated user for Xeetapus (if one does not exist) and set
ownership:

@example
sudo chown -R xeetapus:xeetapus /var/www/xeetapus
sudo touch /var/log/xeetapus.log
sudo chown xeetapus:xeetapus /var/log/xeetapus.log
@end example

@subheading Deploying Files

Copy the built files to the deployment location:

@example
sudo cp backend/zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend /var/www/xeetapus/
sudo cp -r frontend/dist /var/www/xeetapus/
sudo cp backend/.env /var/www/xeetapus/
@end example

Set appropriate permissions:

@example
sudo chmod 750 /var/www/xeetapus
sudo chmod 600 /var/www/xeetapus/.env
@end example

@subheading Production Environment

Edit the @file{/var/www/xeetapus/.env} file with production settings:

@table @asis
@item XEETAPUS_ENV
Set to @code{production}.

@item XEETAPUS_DB_PATH
Set to the absolute path of the database, for example
@code{/var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db}.

@item XEETAPUS_MEDIA_PATH
Set to the absolute path of the media directory,
@code{/var/www/xeetapus/media}.

@item XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS
Set to your production domain(s), for example
@code{https://example.com}.

@item XEETAPUS_JWT_SECRET
@vindex XEETAPUS_JWT_SECRET
Must be set to a strong, random value.  Generate one with:
@example
openssl rand -base64 64
@end example

@item XEETAPUS_CSRF_SECRET
@vindex XEETAPUS_CSRF_SECRET
Must be set to a strong, random value.  Generate one with:
@example
openssl rand -base64 32
@end example
@end table

@node Reverse Proxy
@section Reverse Proxy

A reverse proxy handles incoming HTTP connections, provides TLS
termination, and forwards requests to the Xeetapus backend.

@subheading Installing Nginx

@example
sudo apt install nginx
@end example

@subheading Configuration

Create the nginx configuration at
@file{/etc/nginx/sites-available/xeetapus}:

@verbatim
server {
    listen 80;
    listen [::]:80;
    server_name example.com;

    # Redirect HTTP to HTTPS
    return 301 https://$server_name$request_uri;
}

server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    listen [::]:443 ssl http2;
    server_name example.com;

    # SSL Configuration
    ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem;
    ssl_session_timeout 1d;
    ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:50m;
    ssl_session_tickets off;

    # Modern SSL Configuration
    ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
    ssl_ciphers ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384;
    ssl_prefer_server_ciphers off;

    # Security Headers
    add_header Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains; preload" always;
    add_header X-Frame-Options "DENY" always;
    add_header X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff" always;

    # Upload Size Limit
    client_max_body_size 10M;

    # API Proxy
    location /api {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
        proxy_read_timeout 90s;
    }

    # Media Proxy
    location /media {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    }

    # Frontend Proxy
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        proxy_set_header Host $host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
    }
}
@end verbatim

@subheading Enabling the Site

@example
sudo ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/xeetapus /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/
sudo nginx -t
sudo systemctl reload nginx
@end example

@node TLS Certificates
@section TLS Certificates

HTTPS is required for secure operation.  This section describes how to
obtain certificates using Let's Encrypt.

@subheading Installing Certbot

@example
sudo apt install certbot python3-certbot-nginx
@end example

@subheading Obtaining a Certificate

@example
sudo certbot --nginx -d example.com -d www.example.com
@end example

Follow the prompts to complete the process.

@subheading Auto-Renewal

Let's Encrypt certificates expire after 90 days.  Certbot sets up an
automatic renewal timer:

@example
sudo systemctl enable certbot.timer
sudo systemctl start certbot.timer
@end example

@subheading Manual Certificates

If you have certificates from another provider, place them in a secure
location:

@example
sudo mkdir -p /etc/nginx/ssl
sudo cp your-cert.pem /etc/nginx/ssl/
sudo cp your-key.pem /etc/nginx/ssl/
sudo chmod 600 /etc/nginx/ssl/your-key.pem
@end example

Then update the nginx configuration to reference these files.

@node Service Management
@section Service Management

Run Xeetapus as a system service so it starts automatically and can be
managed with standard commands.

@subheading systemd (Most Linux Distributions)

Create a systemd service file at
@file{/etc/systemd/system/xeetapus.service}:

@verbatim
[Unit]
Description=Xeetapus Social Media Platform
After=network.target

[Service]
Type=simple
User=xeetapus
Group=xeetapus
WorkingDirectory=/var/www/xeetapus
EnvironmentFile=/var/www/xeetapus/.env
ExecStart=/var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus-backend
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
@end verbatim

Then enable and start the service:

@example
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable xeetapus
sudo systemctl start xeetapus
@end example

@subheading OpenRC (Gentoo, Alpine Linux)

Install the provided init script:

@example
sudo cp deploy/openrc/xeetapus /etc/init.d/xeetapus
sudo chmod +x /etc/init.d/xeetapus
@end example

Create the configuration file at @file{/etc/conf.d/xeetapus}:

@verbatim
XEETAPUS_USER=xeetapus
XEETAPUS_GROUP=xeetapus
XEETAPUS_DIR=/var/www/xeetapus
XEETAPUS_LOG=/var/log/xeetapus.log
@end verbatim

Manage the service:

@example
sudo rc-update add xeetapus default
sudo rc-service xeetapus start
@end example

@subheading Managing the Service

Common service management commands:

@example
sudo systemctl start xeetapus    # Start the service
sudo systemctl stop xeetapus     # Stop the service
sudo systemctl restart xeetapus  # Restart the service
sudo systemctl status xeetapus   # Check status
sudo journalctl -u xeetapus      # View logs
@end example

@node Database Management
@section Database Management

The database requires regular maintenance to ensure performance and
reliability.

@subheading Backup

Create a backup before making any significant changes:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db ".backup '/var/backups/xeetapus-$(date +\%Y\%m\%d).db'"
@end example

Or simply copy the file (ensure the server is stopped first):

@example
cp /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db /var/backups/xeetapus.db
@end example

@subheading Restore

To restore from a backup:

@enumerate
@item
Stop the service:
@example
sudo systemctl stop xeetapus
@end example

@item
Replace the database file:
@example
cp /var/backups/xeetapus-20240115.db /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db
@end example

@item
Restart the service:
@example
sudo systemctl start xeetapus
@end example
@end enumerate

@subheading Maintenance

Periodically optimize the database:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db "VACUUM;"
@end example

Check for corruption:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db "PRAGMA integrity_check;"
@end example

Update query planner statistics:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db "ANALYZE;"
@end example

@node Monitoring
@section Monitoring

Monitoring helps you identify problems before they affect users.

@subheading Health Check

The API provides a health check endpoint:

@example
curl https://example.com/api/health
@end example

A healthy service returns:

@example
@{"status":"ok","service":"xeetapus"@}
@end example

Create a monitoring script at @file{/usr/local/bin/xeetapus-health}:

@verbatim
#!/bin/bash
ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8080/api/health"

if curl -sf "$ENDPOINT" > /dev/null; then
    echo "Xeetapus is healthy"
    exit 0
else
    echo "Xeetapus is unhealthy"
    exit 1
fi
@end verbatim

@subheading Log Files

Application logs are written to @file{/var/log/xeetapus.log}.  Check
this file when troubleshooting issues:

@example
sudo tail -f /var/log/xeetapus.log
@end example

@subheading Log Rotation

Configure log rotation to prevent disk space issues.  Create
@file{/etc/logrotate.d/xeetapus}:

@verbatim
/var/log/xeetapus.log @{
    daily
    rotate 14
    compress
    delaycompress
    notifempty
    create 0640 xeetapus xeetapus
    missingok
@}
@end verbatim

@subheading Resource Monitoring

Monitor CPU and memory usage:

@example
top -p $(pgrep xeetapus-backend)
@end example

Check disk usage:

@example
df -h /var/www/xeetapus
@end example

@node Backup Strategy
@section Backup Strategy

A robust backup strategy protects against data loss.

@subheading Automated Backup Script

Create a backup script at @file{/usr/local/bin/xeetapus-backup}:

@verbatim
#!/bin/bash
DATE=$(date +%Y%m%d_%H%M%S)
BACKUP_DIR="/var/backups/xeetapus"
SOURCE_DIR="/var/www/xeetapus"

mkdir -p "$BACKUP_DIR"

# Backup database
sqlite3 "$SOURCE_DIR/xeetapus.db" ".backup '$BACKUP_DIR/db_$DATE.db'"

# Backup configuration (without secrets)
cp "$SOURCE_DIR/.env" "$BACKUP_DIR/env_$DATE"

# Backup media files
tar -czf "$BACKUP_DIR/media_$DATE.tar.gz" -C "$SOURCE_DIR" media/

# Remove backups older than 30 days
find "$BACKUP_DIR" -type f -mtime +30 -delete

echo "Backup completed: $DATE"
@end verbatim

Make the script executable:

@example
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/xeetapus-backup
@end example

@subheading Cron Schedule

Add a cron job to run backups daily:

@example
sudo crontab -e
@end example

Add this line:

@example
0 2 * * * /usr/local/bin/xeetapus-backup
@end example

This runs backups at 2:00 AM daily.

@node Upgrading
@section Upgrading

To update Xeetapus to a new version:

@enumerate
@item
Create a full backup:
@example
/usr/local/bin/xeetapus-backup
@end example

@item
Stop the service:
@example
sudo systemctl stop xeetapus
@end example

@item
Update the source code:
@example
git pull origin main
@end example

@item
Rebuild:
@example
just build
@end example

@item
Deploy the new binary:
@example
sudo cp backend/zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend /var/www/xeetapus/
sudo cp -r frontend/dist/* /var/www/xeetapus/
@end example

@item
Check for database migrations.  Migrations are applied automatically
on startup, but review the release notes for any manual steps.

@item
Start the service:
@example
sudo systemctl start xeetapus
@end example

@item
Verify the deployment:
@example
curl https://example.com/api/health
@end example
@end enumerate

@node Troubleshooting
@section Troubleshooting

This section addresses common deployment issues.

@subsection Service Fails to Start

Check the logs for error messages:

@example
sudo journalctl -u xeetapus -n 50
@end example

Verify the configuration file is readable:

@example
sudo -u xeetapus cat /var/www/xeetapus/.env
@end example

Test the binary manually:

@example
sudo -u xeetapus /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus-backend
@end example

@subsection Database Errors

Check database integrity:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db "PRAGMA integrity_check;"
@end example

If corruption is detected, recover data:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db ".recover" > /tmp/recovered.sql
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus_new.db < /tmp/recovered.sql
@end example

@subsection Connection Refused

Verify the backend is listening:

@example
sudo netstat -tlnp | grep 8080
@end example

Check if the service is running:

@example
sudo systemctl status xeetapus
@end example

Test the API directly:

@example
curl http://localhost:8080/api/health
@end example

@subsection Performance Issues

Check resource usage:

@example
top -p $(pgrep xeetapus-backend)
@end example

Optimize the database:

@example
sqlite3 /var/www/xeetapus/xeetapus.db "VACUUM;"
@end example

Review logs for errors:

@example
sudo tail -100 /var/log/xeetapus.log
@end example

@cindex deployment
@cindex production
@cindex nginx
@cindex backup
