@node Development Guide
@chapter Development Guide

This chapter describes how to set up a development environment for
Xeetapus, how to make changes to the code, and the conventions used
throughout the project.

@menu
* Setting Up::                  Preparing your development environment.
* Project Layout::              Directory structure overview.
* Backend Development::         Working with the Zig backend.
* Frontend Development::        Working with the React frontend.
* Database Development::         Adding tables and queries.
* Testing::                     Writing and running tests.
* Code Quality::               Linting and formatting tools.
* Git Workflow::                Branching and commit conventions.
* Debugging::                  Finding and fixing problems.
* Common Issues::              Solutions to frequent problems.
@end menu

@node Setting Up
@section Setting Up

Before you begin developing Xeetapus, you must install the required
software and clone the repository.

@xref{Getting Started}, for detailed instructions on obtaining the source
code and installing prerequisites.  The following is a brief summary:

@enumerate
@item
Install Zig 0.14.0 or later, SQLite, and Bun 1.2+.

@item
Optionally install Just for simplified task management.

@item
Clone the repository.

@item
Install frontend dependencies: @code{cd frontend && bun install}

@item
Copy and configure environment files: @code{cp backend/.env.example backend/.env}
@end enumerate

Once set up, start the development server with:

@example
just dev
@end example

This starts both the backend and frontend with hot reload enabled.

@node Project Layout
@section Project Layout

The project is organized into several directories:

@table @asis
@item backend/
The Zig backend source code.  This directory contains the HTTP server,
API handlers, database layer, and security implementation.

@table @asis
@item backend/src/
Zig source files organized by functionality.  Each module is typically
contained in a single file.

@item backend/zig-out/
Build output directory.  Contains compiled binaries.

@item backend/.env
Environment configuration.  Should not be committed to version control.
@end table

@item frontend/
The React frontend source code.  Contains the single-page application
that provides the user interface.

@table @asis
@item frontend/src/
TypeScript and React source files.

@item frontend/src/components/
Reusable UI components.

@item frontend/src/pages/
Page components corresponding to application routes.

@item frontend/src/context/
React context providers for global state.

@item frontend/dist/
Production build output.

@item frontend/public/
Static assets served as-is.
@end table

@item deploy/
Deployment-related files including nginx configurations and init scripts.

@item docs/
Documentation in Markdown and Texinfo formats.
@end table

@node Backend Development
@section Backend Development

The backend is written in Zig, a systems programming language that
provides fine-grained control over memory without garbage collection.

@subheading Zig Style Guide

Follow these conventions when writing Zig code:

@table @asis
@item Naming
Use @code{lowercase} for functions and variables.  Use @code{PascalCase}
for types.  Use @code{UPPER_SNAKE_CASE} for constants.

@item Error Handling
Use error unions (@code{!}) for functions that can fail.  Use @code{try}
to propagate errors.  Use @code{catch} to handle errors with default
values.

@item Memory
Use arena allocators for temporary allocations.  Always free memory
when done, or use defer statements.

@item Formatting
Run @code{zig fmt} before committing.  This formats code according to
Zig's standard style.
@end table

@subheading Adding a New Module

To add a new feature to the backend:

@enumerate
@item
Create a new source file in @file{backend/src/}, for example
@file{mymodule.zig}.

@item
Define your module's types and functions:

@verbatim
const std = @import("std");

pub fn handler(
    allocator: std.mem.Allocator,
    req: *http.Request,
    res: *http.Response,
) !void {
    // Implementation here
}
@end verbatim

@item
Register the module in @file{backend/src/main.zig}:

@verbatim
const mymodule = @import("mymodule.zig");

// In main(), after creating the server:
try server.addRoute("GET", "/api/mymodule", mymodule.handler);
@end verbatim

@item
Add any required database tables by modifying the migrations in
@file{backend/src/db.zig}.
@end enumerate

@subheading Running Tests

The backend includes unit tests.  Run them with:

@example
cd backend
zig build test
@end example

@subheading Debugging

Use the built-in logging functions to debug:

@verbatim
std.log.debug("Variable value: @{s@}", .@{variable@});
std.log.info("Processing request", .@{});
std.log.warn("Rate limit approaching for IP: @{s@}", .@{ip@});
std.log.err("Failed to connect: @{}", .@{err@});
@end verbatim

These logs appear in the terminal when running in development mode.

@node Frontend Development
@section Frontend Development

The frontend is a React application built with TypeScript and Vite.

@subheading Component Conventions

Follow these conventions when writing React components:

@table @asis
@item Naming
Use @code{PascalCase} for component names.  Use @code{camelCase} for
functions and variables.  Use @code{UPPER_SNAKE_CASE} for constants.

@item Components
Use functional components with hooks rather than class components:

@verbatim
const MyComponent: React.FC<MyComponentProps> = (@{ prop @}) => {
    const [state, setState] = useState(initialState);
    
    return (
        <div className="my-component">
            @{prop@}
        </div>
    );
};
@end verbatim

@item Types
Define prop types in an interface:

@verbatim
interface MyComponentProps {
    title: string;
    onClick?: () => void;
}
@end verbatim
@end table

@subheading Adding a New Page

To add a new page to the application:

@enumerate
@item
Create a new file in @file{frontend/src/pages/}, for example
@file{NewPage.tsx}:

@verbatim
import React from 'react';

const NewPage: React.FC = () => {
    return (
        <div>
            <h1>New Page</h1>
        </div>
    );
};

export default NewPage;
@end verbatim

@item
Import and add the route in @file{frontend/src/App.tsx}:

@verbatim
import NewPage from './pages/NewPage';

// Inside the Routes component:
<Route path="/newpage" element={
    <PrivateRoute><NewPage /></PrivateRoute>
} />
@end verbatim
@end enumerate

@subheading Adding a New Component

Create reusable components in @file{frontend/src/components/}:

@verbatim
interface MyComponentProps {
    title: string;
    onClick?: () => void;
}

const MyComponent: React.FC<MyComponentProps> = (@{ title, onClick @}) => {
    return (
        <button onClick=@{onClick@} className="my-component">
            @{title@}
        </button>
    );
};

export default MyComponent;
@end verbatim

@subheading Using the API Client

The centralized API client is available at @file{frontend/src/api.ts}.
Import and use it for all API calls:

@verbatim
import api from './api';

// GET request
const response = await api.get('/api/posts');
const posts = await response.json();

// POST request
const response = await api.post('/api/posts', @{
    content: 'Hello, world!'
@});

// Error handling
try @{
    const response = await api.get('/api/posts');
    if (!response.ok) @{
        throw new Error('Failed to fetch posts');
    @}
    const posts = await response.json();
@} catch (error) @{
    console.error('Error:', error);
@}
@end verbatim

@subheading Running Tests

Frontend tests use Vitest and React Testing Library:

@example
cd frontend
bun run test
@end example

Run tests in watch mode:

@example
bun run test -- --watch
@end example

@node Database Development
@section Database Development

The database schema is defined in @file{backend/src/db.zig}.  All
modifications to the schema must be reflected in this file.

@subheading Adding a Table

To add a new database table:

@enumerate
@item
Add a migration statement to the @code{migrations} array in
@file{backend/src/db.zig}:

@verbatim
const migrations = [_][]const u8@{
    // ... existing migrations ...
    \\CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS new_table (
    \\    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    \\    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    \\    created_at DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
    \\);
@};
@end verbatim

@item
If you need to reference the table from other modules, add a struct
definition in the appropriate module:

@verbatim
const NewTable = struct @{
    id: i64,
    name: []const u8,
    created_at: []const u8,
@};
@end verbatim
@end enumerate

@subheading Writing Queries

Always use parameterized queries to prevent SQL injection:

@verbatim
// Correct
const rows = try db.query("SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = ?",
    &[_][]const u8@{username@});
@end verbatim

@quotation Warning
Never concatenate user input directly into SQL strings.  This creates
a SQL injection vulnerability.
@end quotation

@subheading Inspecting the Database

Use the SQLite command-line tool to inspect the database during
development:

@example
sqlite3 backend/xeetapus.db
@end example

Useful commands:

@example
.tables
.schema users
SELECT * FROM users LIMIT 5;
.quit
@end example

@node Testing
@section Testing

Testing ensures that code works correctly and helps prevent regressions
when making changes.

@subheading Backend Tests

Zig includes a built-in testing framework.  Tests are defined using the
@code{test} keyword:

@verbatim
const mymodule = @import("mymodule.zig");

test "my function works correctly" @{
    const result = try mymodule.myFunction();
    try testing.expectEqual(expected, result);
@}
@end verbatim

Run all backend tests:

@example
cd backend
zig build test
@end example

@subheading Frontend Tests

Frontend tests use Vitest with React Testing Library.  Tests are placed
alongside the files they test:

@example
MyComponent.test.tsx
@end example

Example test:

@verbatim
import @{ render, screen @} from '@@testing-library/react';
import MyComponent from './MyComponent';

describe('MyComponent', () => @{
    it('renders correctly', () => @{
        render(<MyComponent title="Test" />);
        expect(screen.getByText('Test')).toBeInTheDocument();
    @});
@});
@end verbatim

Run frontend tests:

@example
cd frontend
bun run test
@end example

Run with coverage:

@example
bun run test:coverage
@end example

@node Code Quality
@section Code Quality

Maintaining consistent code quality helps the project remain readable
and maintainable.

@subsection Frontend Linting

The frontend uses ESLint for static analysis:

@example
cd frontend
bun run lint
@end example

@subsection Type Checking

TypeScript provides compile-time type checking.  Build commands include
type checking:

@example
cd frontend
bun run build
@end example

@subsection Formatting

Format code before committing to maintain consistency:

@example
cd backend
zig fmt src/
@end example

@node Git Workflow
@section Git Workflow

Follow these conventions when contributing to the project.

@subheading Branch Naming

Use descriptive branch names with prefixes:

@table @asis
@item feature/name
New features.

@item fix/description
Bug fixes.

@item docs/description
Documentation updates.

@item refactor/description
Code refactoring without behavior changes.
@end table

Example:

@example
git checkout -b feature/user-blocking
@end example

@subheading Commit Messages

Write clear, concise commit messages that explain @emph{why} a change was
made, not just @emph{what} changed.  Use the imperative mood:

@example
feat: add user blocking feature
fix: resolve authentication token expiry bug
docs: update API documentation
refactor: simplify password hashing logic
test: add unit tests for validation module
@end example

@node Debugging
@section Debugging

This section covers techniques for finding and fixing problems.

@subheading Backend Debugging

Add debug output to trace execution:

@verbatim
std.log.debug("Processing: @{s@}", .@{input@});
std.log.debug("Result: @{}", .@{result@});
@end verbatim

Use structured error handling to get detailed error information:

@verbatim
if (result) |value| @{
    std.log.debug("Success: @{}", .@{value@});
@} else |err| @{
    std.log.err("Error: @{}", .@{err@});
@}
@end verbatim

@subheading Frontend Debugging

Use the browser's developer tools:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Open the console to view logs and errors.

@item
Use the debugger statement to pause execution.

@item
Use React DevTools to inspect component state and props.

@item
Use the Network tab to inspect API requests and responses.
@end itemize

@subheading Database Debugging

Enable query logging by running:

@example
sqlite3 backend/xeetapus.db "PRAGMA query_only = OFF;"
@end example

Use @code{.schema} to inspect table structure:

@example
.schema users
@end example

View recent entries:

@example
SELECT * FROM users ORDER BY created_at DESC LIMIT 10;
@end example

@node Common Issues
@section Common Issues

This section addresses frequently encountered problems.

@subsection Port Already in Use

If the backend fails to start with an address already in use error:

@example
lsof -ti:8080 | xargs kill
@end example

Or simply:

@example
just stop
@end example

@subsection Build Errors

Clean and rebuild from scratch:

@example
just clean
just build
@end example

For the frontend specifically:

@example
rm -rf frontend/node_modules
cd frontend && bun install
@end example

@subsection Database Locked

SQLite may report that the database is locked if multiple processes try
to write simultaneously.  Ensure only one backend process is running:

@example
just stop
@end example

If the lock persists, remove the WAL files:

@example
rm backend/xeetapus.db-wal backend/xeetapus.db-shm 2>/dev/null
@end example

@subsection Missing Dependencies

If you encounter missing module errors:

@example
cd frontend && bun install
@end example

@cindex development
@cindex debugging
@cindex testing
