@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

This chapter describes how to obtain the Xeetapus source code, install
the necessary software, and run Xeetapus on your local machine for
development or evaluation purposes.

@menu
* System Requirements::          What you need to run Xeetapus.
* Obtaining the Source::         Downloading Xeetapus.
* Installing Prerequisites::      Setting up required software.
* Initial Configuration::        Preparing the environment files.
* Building::                     Compiling Xeetapus.
* Running::                       Starting the application.
* Stopping::                     Halting the application.
* Next Steps::                   Where to go from here.
@end menu

@node System Requirements
@section System Requirements

Before installing Xeetapus, ensure that your system meets the
following requirements.

@table @asis
@item Operating System
Xeetapus runs on Linux, macOS, and other Unix-like systems.  Windows
users should use WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux).

@item Zig Compiler
Version 0.14.0 or later.  The Zig compiler is available from
@url{https://ziglang.org/}.

@item SQLite
Any recent version of SQLite3.  Most systems have this installed
already.  The development libraries are required for building.

@item Bun
Version 1.2 or later.  Bun is used for frontend installation, builds,
and development scripts.  Installation instructions are available at
@url{https://bun.sh/}.

@item Just (optional)
A command runner that simplifies common tasks.  Available from
@url{https://github.com/casey/just}.  While optional, it is highly
recommended for a smoother development experience.
@end table

@node Obtaining the Source
@section Obtaining the Source

If you have not already obtained the Xeetapus source code, clone the
repository using Git:

@example
git clone https://github.com/soccera1/xeetapus.git
cd xeetapus
@end example

After cloning, the directory structure should look something like this:

@example
xeetapus/
├── backend/          # Zig backend source
├── frontend/         # React frontend source
├── deploy/           # Deployment scripts and configurations
├── docs/             # Documentation
└── justfile          # Task runner commands
@end example

@node Installing Prerequisites
@subsection Installing Prerequisites

The installation process differs depending on your operating system.
The following subsections describe how to install the prerequisites
on common systems.

@subheading Debian/Ubuntu

On Debian-based systems, use @command{apt} to install the required
packages:

@example
sudo apt update
sudo apt install sqlite3 libsqlite3-dev
@end example

To install Just (optional but recommended):

@example
cargo install just
@end example

Alternatively, Just may be available as a package:

@example
sudo apt install just
@end example

@subheading Arch Linux

On Arch Linux, use @command{pacman}:

@example
sudo pacman -S sqlite just
@end example

@subheading macOS

On macOS, use Homebrew:

@example
brew install sqlite just
@end example

Most macOS systems already have SQLite installed.

@node Initial Configuration
@section Initial Configuration

Xeetapus uses environment variables for configuration.  Template files
are provided for both the backend and frontend.

@subheading Backend Configuration

Change to the backend directory and copy the example environment file:

@example
cd backend
cp .env.example .env
@end example

Open @file{backend/.env} in a text editor.  You must set values for
the following required variables:

@table @asis
@item XEETAPUS_JWT_SECRET
A secret key used for signing JWT tokens.  Generate one with:

@example
openssl rand -base64 64
@end example

@item XEETAPUS_CSRF_SECRET
A secret key for CSRF token generation.  Generate one with:

@example
openssl rand -base64 32
@end example
@end table

@quotation Warning
Never use the example values from @file{.env.example} in production.
Always generate new, random secrets as shown above.
@end quotation

@subheading Frontend Configuration

In a separate terminal, configure the frontend:

@example
cd frontend
cp .env.example .env
@end example

The default frontend configuration should work for local development.
The frontend expects the backend API at @code{http://localhost:8080/api}.

@node Building
@section Building

You may build Xeetapus using the Just task runner (recommended) or
manually.

@subsection Using Just (Recommended)

From the project root directory:

@example
just build
@end example

This builds both the backend and frontend.  The backend binary will be
located at @file{backend/zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend}, and the
frontend build output will be in @file{frontend/dist/}.

@subsection Building Manually

To build only the backend:

@example
cd backend
zig build
@end example

To build only the frontend:

@example
cd frontend
bun install
bun run build
@end example

@node Running
@section Running

You may run Xeetapus in development mode (with hot reload for the
frontend) or in production mode.

@subsection Development Mode (Recommended)

Development mode enables hot reload for the frontend, verbose logging,
and relaxed CORS policies for local testing.

Using Just:

@example
just dev
@end example

Running manually, you will need two terminal windows.  In the first
terminal, start the backend:

@example
cd backend
source .env && ./zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend
@end example

In the second terminal, start the frontend:

@example
cd frontend
bun run dev
@end example

@subsection Production Mode

In production mode, the backend serves the compiled frontend static
files.

Using Just:

@example
just run
@end example

Or manually:

@example
cd backend
source .env && ./zig-out/bin/xeetapus-backend
@end example

@subsection Accessing the Application

Once running, access Xeetapus through your web browser:

@table @asis
@item Frontend
@url{http://localhost:3000} (development) or
@url{http://localhost:8080} (production)

@item Backend API
@url{http://localhost:8080/api}

@item Health Check
@url{http://localhost:8080/api/health}
@end table

The health check endpoint returns a JSON response indicating whether
the service is operational:

@example
@{"status":"ok","service":"xeetapus"@}
@end example

@node Stopping
@section Stopping

To stop Xeetapus, you may use the Just task runner or terminate the
processes manually.

Using Just:

@example
just stop
@end example

This stops both the backend and frontend processes.

To stop manually, find the process using the port and terminate it:

@example
lsof -ti:8080 | xargs kill
@end example

@node Next Steps
@section Next Steps

Now that you have Xeetapus running, you may wish to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Read @ref{System Architecture} to understand how Xeetapus works
internally.

@item
Consult @ref{Configuration} to learn about all available
configuration options.

@item
Study @ref{API Reference} if you intend to develop clients or
integrations.

@item
Read @ref{Development Guide} if you wish to modify or extend
Xeetapus.

@item
Proceed to @ref{Deployment Guide} when you are ready to deploy to a
production server.
@end itemize

@cindex getting started
@cindex installation
@cindex prerequisites
