@node Security Implementation
@chapter Security Implementation

This chapter describes the security measures implemented in Xeetapus.
Security is a primary concern in the design of this software, and
numerous protections are in place to safeguard user data and prevent
unauthorized access.

@menu
* Overview::                    Summary of security features.
* Password Security::          How passwords are protected.
* Token Authentication::       JWT token implementation.
* Session Management::         Cookie security settings.
* CSRF Protection::            Preventing cross-site request forgery.
* Rate Limiting::               Limiting request frequency.
* CORS Policy::                 Controlling cross-origin access.
* Security Headers::           HTTP security headers.
* Input Validation::            Sanitizing user input.
* Path Traversal Prevention::   Securing file access.
* SQL Injection Prevention::    Using parameterized queries.
* Audit Logging::               Logging security events.
* Production Checklist::        Security hardening for deployment.
@end menu

@node Security Overview
@section Overview

Xeetapus implements security through multiple layers.  No single measure
is foolproof, but the combination of several protections makes the
system robust against common attack vectors.

The following table summarizes the security features:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.35 0.15 0.2
@headitem Feature @tab Implementation @tab Default @tab Status
@item Password hashing @tab PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256 @tab 32,768 iterations @tab Enabled
@item JWT tokens @tab HMAC-SHA256 signed @tab 7 day expiry @tab Enabled
@item Session cookies @tab HttpOnly, Secure, SameSite=Lax @tab Varies @tab Enabled
@item CSRF tokens @tab HMAC-SHA256 signed @tab 24 hour expiry @tab Enabled
@item Rate limiting @tab IP-based sliding window @tab 100/minute @tab Enabled
@item CORS @tab Whitelist-based origins @tab localhost only @tab Enabled
@item Security headers @tab Full OWASP set @tab Production @tab Enabled
@item Input validation @tab Strict type checking @tab Enabled @tab Enabled
@item Path traversal prevention @tab Canonical path checking @tab Enabled @tab Enabled
@item SQL injection prevention @tab Parameterized queries @tab Enabled @tab Enabled
@item XSS prevention @tab Content sanitization @tab Enabled @tab Enabled
@item Audit logging @tab Event logging @tab Disabled @tab Optional
@end multitable

These features are always enabled and cannot be disabled individually.
This is a deliberate design choice to ensure that security is never
accidentally weakened.

@node Password Security
@section Password Security

User passwords are protected using PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256, a key derivation
function recommended by OWASP for password storage.

@subheading How It Works

When a user registers or changes their password, the following process
occurs:

@enumerate
@item
A cryptographically random 32-byte salt is generated.

@item
The password is combined with the salt and hashed using PBKDF2 with
32,768 iterations (configurable).

@item
The resulting hash is stored in the database along with the salt and
iteration count.

@item
During login, the stored parameters are retrieved, the same computation
is performed on the submitted password, and the results are compared
using constant-time comparison.
@end enumerate

@subheading Hash Format

Password hashes are stored in the following format:

@example
$pbkdf2-sha256$v2$32768$<base64(salt)>$<base64(hash)>
@end example

This format includes the algorithm version, iteration count, salt, and
hash, allowing future algorithm upgrades while maintaining backward
compatibility.

@subheading Strength Requirements

Passwords must meet the following requirements:

@itemize @bullet
@item
At least 8 characters in length.

@item
At least one uppercase letter.

@item
At least one lowercase letter.

@item
At least one digit.
@end itemize

These requirements are enforced during registration and password changes.

@subheading Production Recommendations

For production deployments, consider increasing the PBKDF2 iteration count
to 60,000 or higher.  This increases the computational cost for
attackers attempting to crack passwords but has minimal impact on normal
login performance:

@example
XEETAPUS_PBKDF2_ITERATIONS=60000
@end example

@node Token Authentication
@section Token Authentication

Xeetapus uses JSON Web Tokens (JWT) for authentication.  A JWT is a
self-contained token that encodes user identity information and is signed
cryptographically.

@subheading Token Structure

A JWT consists of three parts separated by periods:

@example
base64(header).base64(payload).base64(signature)
@end example

The header specifies the algorithm:

@verbatim
@{"alg":"HS256","typ":"JWT"@}
@end verbatim

The payload contains the claims:

@verbatim
@{"sub":1,"iat":1712345678,"exp":1712432078@}
@end verbatim

@table @asis
@item sub (subject)
The user's ID.

@item iat (issued at)
Unix timestamp when the token was created.

@item exp (expiration)
Unix timestamp when the token expires.
@end table

The signature is computed as:

@example
HMAC-SHA256(secret, base64(header).base64(payload))
@end example

@subheading Token Validation

When a request arrives with a session cookie, the server:

@enumerate
@item
Extracts the JWT from the cookie.

@item
Splits the token into its three parts.

@item
Re-computes the expected signature using the server's secret key.

@item
Compares the computed signature with the provided signature (using
constant-time comparison to prevent timing attacks).

@item
Checks that the expiration time has not passed.

@item
If all checks pass, the user ID from the payload is used to load the
user's session.
@end enumerate

If any check fails, the request is rejected with a @code{401 Unauthorized}
response.

@node Session Management
@section Session Management

Sessions are managed using HTTP cookies with security attributes.

@subheading Cookie Attributes

The session cookie is set with the following attributes:

@table @asis
@item Name
@code{session}

@item HttpOnly
When enabled, the cookie cannot be accessed by JavaScript.  This prevents
cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks from stealing the session token.

@item Secure
When enabled, the cookie is only sent over HTTPS connections.  This
prevents the token from being intercepted in transit.  This attribute is
automatically enabled in production mode.

@item SameSite=Lax
The cookie is sent with top-level navigations from the same site and
subsequent GET requests.  This provides some CSRF protection while
maintaining usability.

@item Max-Age
The cookie expires after 7 days (604800 seconds) of inactivity.
@end table

@subheading Session Expiry

Sessions expire automatically after 7 days of inactivity.  When a session
expires, the user must log in again to obtain a new session token.

@node CSRF Protection
@section CSRF Protection

Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) is an attack where a malicious website
tricks a user's browser into making unwanted requests to a different site
where the user is authenticated.

Xeetapus protects against CSRF using signed tokens.

@subheading How It Works

@enumerate
@item
When a user logs in, the server generates a CSRF token and includes it
in the login response.

@item
The token is a string in the format:
@example
timestamp:nonce:signature
@end example
where the signature is computed as:
@example
HMAC-SHA256(secret, timestamp:nonce)
@end example

@item
The frontend stores this token and includes it in the @code{X-CSRF-Token}
header of all state-changing requests (POST, PUT, DELETE).

@item
The server validates the token by recomputing the signature and checking
that the timestamp is recent (within 24 hours).
@end enumerate

@subheading Token Refresh

CSRF tokens expire after 24 hours.  The frontend should periodically
refresh the token by calling @code{GET /api/auth/me}, which returns a
fresh CSRF token in the response.

@subheading When CSRF is Required

CSRF protection applies to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
POST requests
@item
PUT requests
@item
DELETE requests
@end itemize

GET requests do not require CSRF tokens because they should not have
side effects.

@node Rate Limit Sec
@section Rate Limiting

Rate limiting prevents abuse by limiting the number of requests a client
can make within a time window.  This helps mitigate denial-of-service
attacks and brute force attempts.

@subheading Implementation

Xeetapus uses a sliding window algorithm to track request counts per IP
address.  The window slides continuously rather than resetting at fixed
intervals, providing smoother limiting behavior.

The default configuration allows 100 requests per 60-second window.  These
values are configurable:

@example
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_REQUESTS=100
XEETAPUS_RATE_LIMIT_WINDOW=60
@end example

@subheading Response Headers

Every response includes headers indicating the current rate limit status:

@example
X-RateLimit-Limit: 100
X-RateLimit-Remaining: 95
X-RateLimit-Reset: 1712345678
@end example

@subheading When Limited

When a client exceeds the limit, the server responds with @code{429 Too
Many Requests}:

@verbatim
@{
  "error": "Rate limit exceeded. Please try again later.",
  "status": "error"
@}
@end verbatim

The client should wait until the @code{X-RateLimit-Reset} timestamp
before making additional requests.

@node CORS Policy
@section CORS Policy

Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) controls which websites can make
API requests to Xeetapus from browsers.

@subheading Configuration

The allowed origins are configured via the @env{XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS}
environment variable:

@example
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=https://example.com,https://www.example.com
@end example

By default, only @code{http://localhost:3000} is allowed, suitable for
development.

@quotation Important
Never use wildcard origins (@code{*}) in production.  Always specify
exact domains.
@end quotation

@subheading Wildcard Subdomains

For convenience, a limited wildcard pattern is supported for subdomains:

@example
XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS=*.example.com
@end example

This allows @code{app.example.com}, @code{api.example.com}, etc., while
still requiring an exact match for the root domain.

@subheading How It Works

For requests that include credentials (cookies), the server responds with
the specific origin in the @code{Access-Control-Allow-Origin} header
rather than @code{*}.  This allows browsers to enforce CORS policy while
permitting authenticated requests.

@node Security Headers
@section Security Headers

The HTTP server sets several security-related headers on all responses.

@subheading Header Reference

@table @asis
@item X-Frame-Options: DENY
Prevents the page from being displayed in an iframe, protecting against
clickjacking attacks.

@item X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
Prevents browsers from guessing the content type, which could lead to
XSS attacks through MIME type confusion.

@item X-XSS-Protection: 1; mode=block
Enables the browser's built-in XSS filter (for older browsers).

@item Referrer-Policy: strict-origin-when-cross-origin
Controls what information is sent in the Referer header when navigating
between sites.

@item Permissions-Policy: geolocation=(), microphone=(), camera=()
Disables browser features that are not needed by the application.

@item Content-Security-Policy
Restricts which resources can be loaded and from where.  The exact policy
is configured in the source code.

@item Strict-Transport-Security: max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains; preload
(In production only) Forces browsers to use HTTPS for all future requests
to the domain.
@end table

These headers provide defense-in-depth against common web vulnerabilities.

@node Input Validation
@section Input Validation

All user input is validated before processing.  This prevents malformed
data from causing issues and blocks common attack patterns.

@subheading Username Validation

Usernames must:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Be between 3 and 30 characters long.

@item
Contain only letters, numbers, underscores, and hyphens.

@item
Start with a letter.
@end itemize

@subheading Email Validation

Email addresses must:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Be between 5 and 254 characters long.

@item
Contain exactly one @code{@@} symbol.

@item
Contain at least one character before and after the @code{@@}.

@item
Contain at least one dot after the @code{@@}.

@item
Contain no consecutive dots.
@end itemize

@subheading Password Validation

@xref{Password Security}.

@subheading XSS Prevention

User-supplied content is sanitized to prevent cross-site scripting.
The following characters are escaped in output:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{<} becomes @code{&lt;}
@item
@code{>} becomes @code{&gt;}
@item
@code{&} becomes @code{&amp;}
@item
@code{"} becomes @code{&quot;}
@item
@code{'} becomes @code{&#x27;}
@item
@code{/} becomes @code{&#x2F;}
@end itemize

This ensures that any HTML or JavaScript embedded in user content is
rendered harmlessly as text rather than executed as code.

@node Path Traversal Prevention
@section Path Traversal Prevention

When serving static files, the server must ensure that file paths cannot
escape the intended directory.

@subheading How It Works

Before serving a file:

@enumerate
@item
The server receives a request path.

@item
The path is checked for suspicious patterns such as @code{..},
@code{~}, or absolute path indicators.

@item
If any are found, the request is rejected with @code{403 Forbidden}.

@item
Otherwise, the path is converted to a canonical absolute path.

@item
The canonical path is verified to be within the allowed directory.

@item
If it is, the file is served; otherwise, the request is rejected.
@end enumerate

This prevents attackers from accessing sensitive files such as
@file{/etc/passwd} or the application configuration.

@node SQL Injection Prevention
@section SQL Injection Prevention

SQL injection occurs when user input is incorporated directly into SQL
queries, allowing attackers to manipulate the query structure.

@subheading Prevention

Xeetapus prevents SQL injection by using parameterized queries exclusively.
Values are never interpolated directly into SQL strings.

@quotation Safe Example
@example
const users = try db.query("SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = ?",
    &[_][]const u8@{username@});
@end example
@end quotation

@quotation Dangerous Example
Do not use string formatting to build queries:
@verbatim
-- DO NOT DO THIS
const sql = try std.fmt.allocPrint(
    "SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = '{s}'",
    .@{username@});
@end verbatim
@end quotation

Parameterized queries ensure that user input is always treated as data,
never as SQL code.

@node Audit Logging
@section Audit Logging

Security-relevant events are logged for monitoring and forensic purposes.

@subheading Configuration

Audit logging is controlled by the environment:

@itemize @bullet
@item
In development, logs are written to stdout.

@item
In production, logs are written to @file{/var/log/xeetapus.log}.
@end itemize

Ensure proper permissions on the log file and consider log rotation.

@subsection Logged Events

The following events are recorded:

@table @asis
@item Authentication
Login attempts (both successful and failed), logout events, registration
events.

@item Account
Password changes, email changes, account deletions.

@item Social
Blocks and unblocks.

@item Content
Post creation and deletion.
@end table

Each log entry includes a timestamp, event type, affected user ID, and
relevant details.

@node Production Checklist
@section Production Checklist

Before deploying Xeetapus to production, ensure that the following
security measures are in place:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Generate strong secrets for JWT and CSRF using @code{openssl rand -base64 64}
and @code{openssl rand -base64 32}.

@item
Set @env{XEETAPUS_ENV=production}.

@item
Configure @env{XEETAPUS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS} with your exact domain(s).

@item
Enable HTTPS with a valid SSL certificate.

@item
Set secure file permissions on the database and configuration files:
@example
chmod 600 xeetapus.db
chmod 600 .env
@end example

@item
Run the application under a dedicated user account with limited
permissions.

@item
Configure a firewall to restrict access to the server.

@item
Set up log rotation for audit logs.

@item
Configure regular database backups.

@item
Consider enabling HSTS preload.
@end itemize

@cindex security
@cindex authentication
@cindex CSRF
@cindex rate limiting
