\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename xeetapus.info
@settitle Xeetapus Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@finalout

@dircategory Web Services
@direntry
* xeetapus: (xeetapus).              A social media platform written in Zig and React.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual is for Xeetapus, a social media platform (similar to X/Twitter).

Copyright @copyright{} 2024 Xeetapus Contributors

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Xeetapus Manual
@subtitle A social media platform built with Zig and React
@author The Xeetapus Team

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@headings double

@ifnothtml
@shortcontents
@summarycontents
@end ifnothtml

@node Top
@top Xeetapus

Xeetapus is a fully functional social media platform featuring posts,
comments, likes, follows, communities, direct messages, polls, and
analytics.  The backend is written in Zig while the frontend uses React
with TypeScript.

This manual describes how to install, configure, run, develop, and
deploy Xeetapus.

@menu
* Getting Started::              How to obtain and run Xeetapus.
* Configuration::               Customizing Xeetapus for your environment.
* System Architecture::          How Xeetapus is structured internally.
* API Reference::                Complete documentation of the HTTP API.
* Database Schema::              Description of the database tables.
* Security Implementation::       How security is implemented.
* Development Guide::             Modifying and extending Xeetapus.
* Deployment Guide::              Installing Xeetapus on a production server.
@end menu

@include getting-started.texi
@include configuration.texi
@include architecture.texi
@include api-reference.texi
@include database.texi
@include security.texi
@include development.texi
@include deployment.texi

@bye
